# basex-waxeye

An implementation of the [Waxeye PEG parser generator](https://waxeye.org/) for [BaseX](https://github.com/BaseXdb/basex).


# Installing

Before building basex-waxeye, you must have built and installed [SMAX](https://github.com/nverwer/SMAX).

Run `maven install`.
This will produce `target/basex-waxeye-n.m.l.jar`, according to the specification in the [BaseX documentation](https://docs.basex.org/main/Repository#java).
To install this into BaseX, simply copy the jar to `basex/lib/custom`,
then restart BaseX.


# Using

The Java code follows the integration pattern described in the [BaseX documentation](https://docs.basex.org/main/Java_Bindings#integration).
The Java function `FuncItem waxeyPegParser(Object, Map<String, String>)`
is available in XQuery as 
```xquery
peg:waxey-peg-parser($grammar as (xs:string | xs:anyURI), $options as map(xs:string, xs:string))
  as function((xs:string | node())) as node()*
```
where the `peg` namespace is `org.greenmercury.basex.xquery.functions.peg.PEGModule`.

The following is an example of using the waxeye-peg-parser function in XQuery:
```xquery
import module namespace peg='org.greenmercury.basex.xquery.functions.peg.PEGModule';
let $grammar := ``[palindrome <- 'a' :?palindrome 'a' | 'b' ?:palindrome 'b' | 'c' ?:palindrome 'c' | 'a' | 'b' | 'c']``
let $options := map {  }
let $peg := peg:waxey-peg-parser($grammar, $options)
let $input := ``[abcbaabba]``
let $output := $peg($input)
return $output
```
This will return two elements:
```
<Palindrome>abcba</Palindrome>
<Palindrome>abba</Palindrome>
```

The format of the grammar is described in the [Waxeye documentation](https://waxeye.org/manual).
Compiling a grammar into a parsing function is slow, and the parsing function returned by `peg:waxey-peg-parser` should be re-used when the grammar does not change.

## Options

The `peg:waxey-peg-parser` function accepts the following options:

* `modular` Set to true if the grammar is [modular](https://waxeye.org/manual#_modular_grammars). (Default is false.)
* `complete-match` Set to true if the complete input text must be parsed as one matched fragment. (Default is false.)
* `adjacent-matches` Set to true if the complete input must be consumed as adjacent matched fragments. (Default is false.)
* `match-whole-words` Set to true to only match whole words. (Default is false.)
* `parse-errors` Set to true to include errors in the output and not trigger an exception. (Default is false.)
* `normalize` Set to true if characters in the input must be converted to low ASCII characters, removing diacritics and ligatures. (Default is false.)

If `complete-match` is true, `adjacent-matches` is ignored because there must be only one match.

If `adjacent-matches` is true, there may be multiple adjacent matched fragments, but no unmatched text.

If `parse-errors` is true, errors are represented by `<fn:error>` elements in the "http://www.w3.org/2005/xpath-functions" namespace.

If both `complete-match` and `adjacent-matches` are false, the result is a mix of unmatched text and an arbitrary number of matched fragments.
In this case, no parsing errors will be generated, and `parse-errors` is ignored.


# Parsing transparent XML

The parsing function generated by `peg:waxey-peg-parser` accepts an XML element as its input.
This element may contain descendant elements, which will be ignored by the parser.
The descendant elements are still present in the output, and are 'transparent' to the parser.

For example, when parsing the input
```xml
<r>ab<c>c</c>badabba</r>
```
with the palindrome grammar given earlier, the output will be:
```xml
<r><Palindrome>ab<c>c</c>ba</Palindrome>d<Palindrome>abba</Palindrome></r>
```
XML transparency is achieved by representing the XML as a [SMAX](https://github.com/nverwer/SMAX) document.


# Building and installing Waxeye

A version of Waxeye is already available in 'src/main/resources`.
The following instructions are only relevant when a new version of waxeye must be used.

Waxeye is an external program, which must be compiled separately.
We use a [modified version](https://github.com/nverwer/waxeye) of waxeye.
Make sure that this is the version that you have cloned.

To support both Linux / MacOS and Windows, two binaries and a jar file must be generated.
You can do this on a Windows machine by installing WSL and Ubuntu.
It is also possible to only support Linux / MacOS when nobody uses Windows anymore after 14 October 2025. 

On both Windows and Linux, [Racket](http://racket-lang.org) must be installed.
See the README.md of waxeye for detailed instructions.

In Windows, go to the waxeye root directory (where you cloned waxeye) and execute `.\build\exe.bat`.
This will generate a `waxeye.exe` in the waxeye root directory, and a `waxeye.jar` in the `lib` directory.

In Linux / MacOS, go to the waxeye root directory (where you cloned waxeye) and execute `make compiler`.
This will generate a `waxeye` executable in the `bin` directory, and a `waxeye.jar` in the `lib` directory.

The newly generated files must now be copied into basex-waxeye.

1. Copy `waxeye/lib/waxeye.jar` to `basex-waxeye/lib/waxeye.jar`.

2. Copy `waxeye/waxeye.exe`, `waxeye/bin` (directory), and `waxeye/lib` (directory) into the `basex-waxeye/src/main/resources` directory.